
Combability
-----------

It is desirable to introduce "light-touch" approach to the construct lowering (loops, if, switch etc). Since the fall-through machine can already merge forward iterations, this is only essential for definite for loops which are indeed combable. But it is desirable for all constructs - the fall thru machine will be less bulky, with fewer states and constructs that reasonably could appear in the output RTL code untouched should do so (as one of the overall project objectives).

We can categorise constructs as follows:
1. Always intriniscally uncombable (function call, do, while) 
2. Sometimes intrinsically uncombable (for, switch)
3. Never intrinsically uncombable (if, &&, ||, ?:)

In all of these cases, if there is anything uncombable underneath the construct, ie in its condition or body, then the construct must be lowered.  There are other kinds of Statements that are uncombable, but which are not lowere here: Yield, Label, Goto. From the point of view of analysis, these are similar to category 1 constructs.

It might appear that we can order this best by doing category 1 first, and arrange for the output of the cat 1 lowerings to triger the cat 2 and 3 lowerings. But there is an existing partial ordering to these lowerings, since some lowerings generate output that contains another construct which itself may need lowering - the "inferral ordering".

So instead we seek to apply the lowerings in an order decided based on the existing ordering. And of course we would prefer not to have to repeat steps.

This suggests we need a way of detecting uncombables underneath a construct, ideally with some consistency. We can insert a tree intermediate called UncombableStatement under Statement as a base for Call, Do, While, Yield, Label, Goto. This means it does not matter when we do the cat 1 lowerings, since they will be detected uncombable beofre and after their lowering step. But the cat 2 constructs are sometimes combable and sometimes not.

Cat 2 could be simplified if some earlier step converted the intrinsically uncombable case (indefinte for loops, switches with fall-thru) into new kinds of nodes eg UncobmableFor, UncombableSwitch. Then these could be cat 1 (and so derive from UncombableStatemnet) and combable cat 2 nodes would be cat3. Obviously, the comable versions might still need lowering it they have uncombables below. We do not want to code the For and Switch lowering steps twice for each kind of loop so an intermediate would be needed for both kinds of for node that contained all the useful members. 

Since we now only have cat 1 and 3 constructs, and the type 1 constructs are all unambiguously detectable by searching for UncombableStatement, we can now place the actual lowerings in any order we want (wrt uncomabble detection) and hence fully free to order per the inferral ordering. The sequence of steps is thus:

- split cat2 into comable and uncomable variants
- do all the actual lowerings in the natural order, which is (basically)
    - For
    - While, Do
    - &&, ||, ?:
    - If, Switch
 
CORRECTION: actually going to create Uncomable : Node and then tuck it in as required eg While : Loop, Uncomable and 
UncomableFor : For, Uncombable and obviously UncomableFor is a local node due to finality rules.

Break, Continue
---------------

Continue is handled inside loop lowering steps: in the case of For, it would make the for loop uncomable and trigger lowering.
Break is presently done in a seperate step. Break and Continue are not considered uncombable in their own right, since break can be part of a combable switch statement. But the presence of break or continue in a For loop would render that for loop indefinite and hence uncombable.

Overall, as long as the constructs themselves are correctly designated into cat 1 or cat 3 then the lowering of break, continue can carry on working as it does presently.

Verilog disable
---------------

I suspect, though not sure, that Synthesisable Verilog can support a keyword called "disable" which seems to be able to exit a compound block, hence similar to continue/break/return though not identical. This would seem to imply the existance of comable break, continue and return operations. Actually at this stage return must still always be taken as uncombable (add to UncomableStatement?).

If we allow break/continue to stick around in unlowered constructs, it seems like we would need to do break/continue lowering in any lowerng step that does indeed act, which feeld like duplication.

We might want to exploit disable to simplify the lowering of various constructs, particularly given its greater expressivity (it can exit any of the enclosing compound blocks).

This is a matter for consideration - I do not intend to use disable at present. Let's get the rest of this working first!

Exit, Cease
-----------

These are marked uncombable too, so that they get pulled out of enclosing constructs. 

Most likely verilog simulators can be persuaded to just cease when the algorithm is done as with systemc, but I'm not sure, and I may need to align cessation with exiting an always block. Either way, the intermediates will look better if I get out of ifs, fors etc when ceasing. 

Sequence point issue
--------------------

It is worth noting that this method does not deem side effects as uncombable. Therefore, we are calling eg

x++ && x

combable and trusting Verilog to get it right. Therefore, we will leave sequence points behind that are near side effects AND do not co-incide with semicolons, i.e. would generate SCSP (simple combable sequence points). It is believed that such statements will remain atomic and will not contain compound expressions. We must break up eg

x++ && ({ blah; blah })

but do not need to break up any enclosing constructs, therefore the test for &&, ||, ?: should trigger on uncombables and compound statements. 

A final list of UncomableStatements is thus:
Call, 
While, Do
Goto, Label, Return
Wait, Exit, Cease
UncomableFor, UncombableSwitch

Implementation note
-------------------

It will be a frequent requirement to detect uncomables under a given node. While the pattern to do this is simple, basically

MatchAll( original_search_pattern, Stuff( Uncombable ) )

I will provide a factored out implementation.
